Sun Microsystems, Inc.
901 San Antonio Road
Palo Alto, CA 94303 USA
650 960-1300 fax 650 969-9131
http://www.sun.com/blueprints
Data Security
Policy - Structure and
Guidelines
By JoelWeise - SunPSSM Global Security Practice
and Charles R. Martin - SunPS Java™Centers
Sun BluePrints™OnLine - December 2001
Part No.: 816-4175-01
Revision 01, 12/18/01
Edition: December 2001
Please
Recycle
Copyright 2001 Sun Microsystems, Inc. 901 San Antonio Road, Palo Alto, California 94303 U.S.A. All rights reserved.
This product or document is protected by copyright and distributed under licenses restricting its use, copying, distribution, and decompilation.
No part of this product or document may be reproduced in any form by any means without prior written authorization of Sun and its licensors,
if any. Third-party software, including font technology, is copyrighted and licensed from Sun suppliers.
Parts of the product may be derived from Berkeley BSD systems, licensed from the University of California. UNIX is a registered trademark in
the U.S. and other countries, exclusively licensed through X/Open Company, Ltd.
Sun, Sun Microsystems, the Sun logo, Sun BluePrints, and Solaris are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the
United States and other countries.
The OPEN LOOK and Sun™ Graphical User Interface was developed by Sun Microsystems, Inc. for its users and licensees. Sun acknowledges
the pioneering efforts of Xerox in researching and developing the concept of visual or graphical user interfaces for the computer industry. Sun
holds a non-exclusive license from Xerox to the Xerox Graphical User Interface, which license also covers Sun’s licensees who implement OPEN
LOOK GUIs and otherwise comply with Sun’s written license agreements.
RESTRICTED RIGHTS: Use, duplication, or disclosure by the U.S. Government is subject to restrictions of FAR 52.227-14(g)(2)(6/87) and
FAR 52.227-19(6/87), or DFAR 252.227-7015(b)(6/95) and DFAR 227.7202-3(a).
DOCUMENTATION IS PROVIDED “AS IS” AND ALL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED CONDITIONS, REPRESENTATIONS ANDWARRANTIES,
INCLUDING ANY IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NONINFRINGEMENT,
ARE DISCLAIMED, EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT THAT SUCH DISCLAIMERS ARE HELD TO BE LEGALLY INVALID.
Copyright 2001 Sun Microsystems, Inc., 901 San Antonio Road, Palo Alto, Californie 94303 Etats-Unis. Tous droits r?serv?s.
relative aux polices de caract?res, est prot?g? par un copyright et licenci? par des fournisseurs de Sun.
Des parties de ce produit pourront ?tre d?riv?es des syst?mes Berkeley BSD licenci?s par l’Universit? de Californie. UNIX est une marque
d?pos?e aux Etats-Unis et dans d’autres pays et licenci?e exclusivement par X/Open Company, Ltd.
Sun, Sun Microsystems, le logo Sun, Sun BluePrints, et Solaris sont des marques de fabrique ou des marques d?pos?es, ou marques de service,
de Sun Microsystems, Inc. aux Etats-Unis et dans d’autres pays. Toutes les marques SPARC sont utilis?es sous licence et sont des marques de
fabrique ou des marques d?pos?es de SPARC International, Inc. aux Etats-Unis et dans d’autres pays. Les produits portant les marques SPARC
sont bas?s sur une architecture d?velopp?e par Sun Microsystems, Inc.
L’interface d’utilisation graphique OPEN LOOK et Sun™ a ?t? d?velopp?e par Sun Microsystems, Inc. pour ses utilisateurs et licenci?s. Sun
reconna?t les efforts de pionniers de Xerox pour la recherche et le d?veloppement du concept des interfaces d’utilisation visuelle ou graphique
pour l’industrie de l’informatique. Sun d?tient une licence non exclusive de Xerox sur l’interface d’utilisation graphique Xerox, cette licence
couvrant ?galement les licenci?s de Sun qui mettent en place l’interface d’utilisation graphique OPEN LOOK et qui en outre se conforment aux
licences ?crites de Sun.
CETTE PUBLICATION EST FOURNIE "EN L’ETAT" ET AUCUNE GARANTIE, EXPRESSE OU IMPLICITE, N’EST ACCORDEE, Y COMPRIS
DES GARANTIES CONCERNANT LA VALEUR MARCHANDE, L’APTITUDE DE LA PUBLICATION A REPONDRE A UNE UTILISATION
PARTICULIERE, OU LE FAIT QU’ELLE NE SOIT PAS CONTREFAISANTE DE PRODUIT DE TIERS. CE DENI DE GARANTIE NE
S’APPLIQUERAIT PAS, DANS LA MESURE OU IL SERAIT TENU JURIDIQUEMENT NUL ET NON AVENU.
1
Data Security Policy - Structure and
Guidelines
This template provides a brief description of recommended security policy topics
and an overview of core security policies. In addition, this template provides a
sample Data Security Policy and Statement with commentary explaining the details
of each security topic and why it was chosen. Finally, this template provides a
detailed list of Security Policy principles. The purpose of this template is to help
guide the development and implementation of an industry best practice Data
Security Policy.
This template is built on the recommendations made in the Sun BluePrints article,
Developing a Security Policy (12/01), by Joel Weise and Charles R. Martin. The article
is available from:
http://sun.com/blueprints/1201/secpolicy.pdf
Security Policy Topics
This section provides a brief description of recommended topics for a data security
policy.
Statement of Purpose
Why the policy is needed.
Scope
What is the policy’s applicability, who and what is covered by it?
2 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
Policy Statement
What are the specifics of the policy?
Responsibilities
Who must do what?
Audience
To whom is the policy oriented?
Enforcement
Who is charged with enforcement of the policy?
What are the penalties for non-compliance?
Exception
Describe these and the conditions under which they apply.
Other Considerations
Are there other ancillary considerations that should be stated?
Communicating Policy
Who is responsible for this effort?
What is the process for disseminating the policy?
Review and Update Process
Who is responsible for the update effort?
What is the process?
Under what conditions is the policy reviewed? (for example, annually or only if a
problem occurs)
Overview of Security Policies 3
Implementing the Policy
Who is responsible for the implementation effort?
How is it accomplished?
Monitoring compliance
How is monitoring accomplished?
Overview of Security Policies
The following is a list of standard common core security policies.
1. Data ownership, classification, and security
2. Trans-border data flow
3. Data and resource access
4. Password usage
5. Utilization of cryptography and key management
6. Data content
7. Network security
8. Physical security
9. Electronic mail ownership
10. Security incident reporting process
11. Security incident response process
12. Periodic monitoring and audit for policy compliance
13. Firewall implementation and management
14. Virus prevention and protection
15. System and network ownership and management
16. End user accountability and acceptable use
a. Identification and authentication
4 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
17. Records retention and backup
18. Security Awareness and education
19. Partner and 3rd party connectivity
20. System development and deployment
21. System, application, and configuration management
a. Assurance
b. Patch management
22. Infrastructure security
a. Intrusion detection
b. System hardening
Sample Data Security Policy
The best way to illustrate how to develop and write a security policy is to dissect a
sample of one. The following section offers a sample Data Security Policy.
Commentary has been added so that one can see why specific topics are included,
their content, verbiage, and context.
Introduction
A purpose should be stated in the introduction section. This should provide the reader with
an overview of what this policy will state and why it is needed.
The purpose of this document is to define the <COMPANY> Data Security Policy.
Data is considered a primary asset and as such must be protected in a manner
commensurate to its value. Data security is necessary in today's environment
because data processing represents a concentration of valuable assets in the form of
information, equipment, and personnel. Dependence on information systems creates
a unique vulnerability for our organization.
Security and privacy must focus on controlling unauthorized access to data. Security
compromises or privacy violations could jeopardize our ability to provide service;
lose revenue through fraud or destruction of proprietary or confidential data; violate
Sample Data Security Policy 5
business contracts, trade secrets, and customer privacy; or reduce credibility and
reputation with its customers, shareholders and partners. This policy therefore
discusses:
n Data content
n Data classification
n Data ownership
n Data security
The introduction also includes an objective statement. For data security, a life cycle
methodology is used.
The main objective of this policy is to ensure that data is protected in all of its forms,
on all media, during all phases of its life cycle, from unauthorized or inappropriate
access, use, modification, disclosure, or destruction. This policy applies to all of our
and all customer data assets that exist, in any of our processing environments. The
processing environment is considered to be, collectively, all applications, systems,
and networks that we own or operate or that are operated by our agents.
A condensation of the overall policy is provided here. The security stance for your
organization should be clearly defined here.
This policy defines the <COMPANY> overall security and risk control objectives that
we endorse. The premise for the policy can be stated as:
“Other than data defined as public, which is accessible to all identified
and authenticated users, all data and processing resources are only
accessible on a need to know basis to specifically identified,
authenticated, and authorized entities.”
This embodies the principle of least privilege.
This document forms part of your conditions of employment for employees, a part
of the contractual agreement for vendors, suppliers, and third party processor or
agents, hereafter referred to as vendors. All parties must read the policy completely,
and confirm that they understand the contents of the policy and agree to abide by it.
Breach of Policy and Enforcement
What is considered a breach and the consequences of a breach occurring are stated in this
section. The breach of a policy usually implies an adverse action. If there are no adverse
ramifications of a breach, then you should review the necessity of the policy.
A breach of this policy could have severe consequences to <COMPANY>, its ability
to provide services, or maintain the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of
services.
6 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
Intentional misuse resulting in a breach of any part of this policy will result in
disciplinary action at the discretion of <COMPANY> senior management. Severe,
deliberate or repeated breaches of the policy may be considered grounds for instant
dismissal; or in the case of a <COMPANY> vendor, termination of their contracted
services. All employees and vendors are bound by these policies and are responsible
for their strict enforcement.
Scope of the Policy
The scope should explain the policy's applicability—that is, who and what are covered by it.
The applicability of the policy should be defined by management. The level of definition is
dependent upon the intentions of management.
This policy applies to all <COMPANY> and customer data assets that exist in any
<COMPANY> processing environment, on any media during any part if its life
cycle. The following entities or users are covered by this policy:
n Full or part-time employees of <COMPANY> who have access to <COMPANY>
or customer data.
n <COMPANY> vendors or processors who have access to <COMPANY> or
customer data.
n Other persons, entities, or organizations that have access to <COMPANY> or
customer data.
Data Life Cycle
It is recommended that a data security policy utilize a data lifecycle methodology. This allows
for an easier implementation of the policy for different data under different circumstances.
The security of data can be understood through the use of a data life cycle. The
typical life cycle of data is: generation, use, storage and disposal. The following
sections provide guidance as to the application of this policy through the different
life cycle phases of data.
Users of data assets are personally responsible for complying with this policy. All
users will be held accountable for the accuracy, integrity, and confidentiality of the
information to which they have access. Data must only be used in a manner
consistent with this policy.
Sample Data Security Policy 7
Data Usage
Data usage describes how data is utilized. This section should not be overly detailed but
rather ensure the consistency of the application of the policy.
All users that access <COMPANY> or customer data for use must do so only in
conformance to this policy. Uniquely identified, authenticated and authorized users
must only access data.
Each user must ensure that <COMPANY> data assets under their direction or
control are properly labeled and safeguarded according to their sensitivity,
proprietary nature, and criticality.
Access control mechanisms must also be utilized to ensure that only authorized
users can access data to which they have been granted explicit access rights.
Data Transmission
Data transmission describes how data is conveyed through a network. As with usage, this
should not be overly detailed. Data transmission policy may include the need for the use of
cryptography if applicable.
All users that access <COMPANY> or customer data to enable its transmission must
do so only in conformance to this policy.
Where necessary, data transmitted must be secured via cryptographic mechanisms.
This may include the use of confidentiality and/or integrity mechanisms. Specific
cryptographic mechanisms are noted in the <COMPANY> policy on the use of
cryptography.
Data Storage
Data storage describes how data is stored or filed. As with usage, this should not be overly
detailed. Data storage policy may also include the need for the use of cryptography if
applicable.
All users that are responsible for the secure storage of <COMPANY> or customer
data must do so only in conformance to this policy.
Where necessary, data stored must be secured via cryptographic mechanisms. This
may include the use of confidentiality and/or integrity mechanisms. Specific
cryptographic mechanisms are noted in the <COMPANY> policy on the use of
cryptography.
8 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
Access control mechanisms must also be utilized to ensure that only authorized
users can access data to which they have been granted explicit access rights.
Data Disposal
Data disposal describes how data is destroyed. This policy statement is dependent upon the
type of media used for data storage.
Access control mechanisms must also be utilized to ensure that only authorized
users can access data to which they have been granted explicit access rights during
the disposal process.
The Data Security organization must develop and implement procedures to ensure
the proper disposal of various types of data. These procedures must be made
available to all users with access to data that requires special disposal techniques.
Data Security Policy Statement
This section describes the particulars of the data security policy. This section should
provide sufficient information to guide the development and implementation of
guidelines and specific data security procedures.
Goals
Goals describe the managerial objectives of the policy, and why it is necessary.
This policy has been written with the following goals in mind:
n To educate <COMPANY> users and vendors about their obligation for protection
all data assets.
n To ensure the security, integrity, and availability of all <COMPANY> and
customer data.
n To establish the <COMPANY> baseline data security stance and classification
schema.
Data Security Policy Statement 9
Processing Environment
It is often useful to specify the actual environment where the policy applies. This could place
limits on the policy as are appropriate to the organization.
The <COMPANY> processing environment that this policy applies to is comprised
of:
n Applications – Application software is system or network-level routines and
programs designed by (and for) system users and customers. It supports specific
business-oriented processes, jobs, or functions. It can be general in nature or
specifically tailored to a single or limited number of functions.
n Systems – A system is an assembly of computer hardware (e.g., sub-networks,
application servers, file servers, workstations, data, etc.) and application software
configured for the purpose of processing, handling, storing, transmitting, and
receiving data, that is used in a production or support environment to sustain
specific applications and business organizations in their performance of tasks and
business processes.
n Networks – A network is defined as two or more systems connected by a
communication medium. It includes all elements (e.g., routers, switches, bridges,
hubs, servers, firewalls, controllers, and other devices) that are used to transport
information between systems.
Data Security Responsibilities
It is important that the policy detail the specific responsibilities of each organization and/or
identifiable user population. Data security is called out first as it is the primary organization
responsible for supporting this policy.
The Data Security organization is responsible for:
n Defining the security requirements, controls and mechanisms applicable to all
data assets.
n Defining the methods and guidelines used to identify and classify all data assets.
n Defining the procedures for identifying data owners for all data assets.
n Defining the labeling requirements for all data assets.
n Defining all other data security usage, processing, transmission, storage and
disposal processes and procedures.
n Defining the procedures necessary to ensure compliance to this policy by all
<COMPANY> users and vendors.
n Facilitating the evaluation of new regulatory, legal, and also best practice
requirements as they are mandated or become recognized in industry.
10 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
The Data Security, Network Operations and Systems Administration organizations must
ensure the activation of all security mechanisms.
Management Responsibilities
It is important that the policy detail the specific responsibilities of each organization and/or
identifiable user population. A section particular to management is always a good idea.
Other organizations within <COMPANY> also have various responsibilities for
ensuring compliance with this policy, such as:
n All individual organizations must ensure that staff complies with this policy.
n The Network Operations and Systems Administration organizations must ensure that
adequate logs and audit trails are kept of all data access.
n The Data Security, Network Operations and Systems Administration organizations
must ensure the activation of all security mechanisms.
n The Risk Management organization is responsible for communicating business
requirement and issues for business processes and the data those include, to
ensure their correct data classification.
n The internal audit organization is responsible for regularly evaluating the data
classification schema for consistent application and use.
Other Responsibilities
It is important that the policy detail the specific responsibilities of each organization and/or
identifiable user population. Residual responsibilities can be explained last.
Other organizations have responsibilities to comply with this policy, such as:
n All <COMPANY> agents, vendors, content providers, and third party providers
that process customer data must have a documented security policy that clearly
identifies those data and other resources and the controls that are being imposed
upon them.
n All <COMPANY> agents, vendors, content providers, and third party providers
that access the <COMPANY> processing environment and its data or provide
content to it must have a security policy that complies with and does not
contradict the <COMPANY> security policy.
n All agents, vendors, content providers, and third party providers must agree not
to bypass any of our security requirements.
Data Security Policy Statement 11
Documentation
Documentation is required to enable the day to day efforts necessary to enforce the data
security policy. Documentation also ensures that the policy is implemented consistently on
all platforms.
This policy requires procedures be developed, managed and performed. As such,
written documentation must be developed for all procedures necessary to fulfill this
policy including:
n The management of all userids on all platforms.
n The management of all access control lists on all platforms.
n The execution and review of all audit trails.
n All incident response and reporting.
n All other tasks necessary to support this policy.
Policy Review
A policy review should be performed at least on an annual basis to ensure that the policy is
current.
It is the responsibility of the Data Security organization to facilitate the review of
this policy on a regular basis. Because of the dynamic nature of the Internet, this
policy should be reviewed annually. Senior management, Systems administration,
and Legal should, at a minimum, be included in the annual review of this policy.
Data Content
Data content is a subject particular to data security. If necessary, limits on the type of data
and how they might be used are discussed here.
The nature of specific data content that exists in the processing environment, and the
controls that should apply to these, is dependent upon various factors. This policy
does not mandate or endorse particular data content. Rather, the business decision
process used to evaluate the inclusion or exclusion of particular data content should
consider those items listed below. Regardless as to the specific data content that
exists in the environment, all aspects of this policy must be enforced. Considerations
for evaluating data content include:
n Legal and regulatory obligations in the locales in which we operate.
n Can privacy, confidentiality, security, and integrity of the data be ensured to the
satisfaction of customers and legal authorities?
n Is it in line with our business goals and objectives?
12 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
n Do customers require or demand access to specific data content.
n What is common local practice? (e.g., pornography is legal in some communities
but strongly frowned upon in others.)
n What rules govern the movement across international boundaries of different
data content, and do we have in place controls to enforce these rules?
Data Classification
Data classification is a core feature of a data security policy. A well defined data classification
schema is essential for a data security policy. This must represent all of the types of data that
exist or can exist in your environment. Examples may be a useful component of this section.
Data classification is necessary to enable the allocation of resources to the protection
of data assets, as well as determining the potential loss or damage from the
corruption, loss or disclosure of data.
To ensure the security and integrity of all data the default data classification for any
data asset is either Confidential Customer Data or Proprietary Company Data.
The Data Security organization is responsible for evaluating the data classification
schema and reconciling it with new data types as they enter usage. It may be
necessary, as we enter new business endeavors, to develop additional data
classifications.
All data found in the processing environment must fall into one of the following
categories:
n Public Company Data – Public company data is defined as data that any entity
either internal or external to <COMPANY> can access. The disclosure, use or
destruction of Public company data will have limited or no adverse affects on
<COMPANY> nor carry any significant liability. (Examples of Public company
data include readily available news, stock quotes, or sporting information.)
n Proprietary Company Data – Proprietary company data is any information that
derives its economic value from not being publicly disclosed. It includes
information that <COMPANY> is under legal or contractual obligation to protect.
The value of proprietary company information to <COMPANY> would be
destroyed or diminished if such information were disclosed to others. Most
<COMPANY> sensitive information should fall into this category. Proprietary
company information may be copied and distributed within <COMPANY> only
to authorized users. Proprietary company information disclosed to authorized
external users must be done so under a non-disclosure agreement. (Examples of
Proprietary company data include company policies, sales plans, and application
source code.)
Data Security Policy Statement 13
n Confidential Company Data – Confidential Company Data is information that is
not to be publicly disclosed, regardless of its economic value. The disclosure, use,
or destruction of Confidential Company Data can have adverse affects on
<COMPANY> and possibly carry significant civil, fiscal, or criminal liability. This
designation is used much less frequently. It is used for highly sensitive
information whose access is restricted to selected, authorized employees. The
recipients of confidential information have an obligation not to reveal the contents
to another individual unless that person has a valid need to know for the
information. Company confidential information must not be copied without
authorization from the identified owner. (Examples of Confidential Company
Data include company strategic plans or cryptographic keys.)
n Confidential Customer Data – Confidential customer data is defined as data that
only authorized internal <COMPANY> entities or specific authorized external
entities can access. The disclosure, use, or destruction of confidential customer
data can have adverse affects on <COMPANY> and their relationship with their
customers, and possibly carry significant liability for both. Confidential customer
data is entrusted to and may transit or is stored by <COMPANY> (and others)
over which they have custodial responsibility but do not have ownership.
(Examples of Confidential customer data including customer bank or brokerage
account information, cryptographic keys, or other data considered private.)
n Public Customer Data – Public customer data is defined as data that any entity
either internal or external to <COMPANY> can access. The disclosure, use, or
destruction of Public customer data will have limited or no adverse affects on
<COMPANY> or the customer, and carry no significant liability. Public customer
data is entrusted to, and may transit or be stored by <COMPANY> (and others)
over which they have custodial responsibility but do not have ownership.
(Examples of Public customer data include emails, public key certificates or other
customer data that is readily available through other public channels or records.)
Data Ownership
The concept of data ownership allows for an entity to be declared responsible for the
classification of data. This is an essential element of a data classification schema. You should
have management direct the determination of data owner, so that the policy reflects data
ownership accurately.
In order to classify data it is necessary that an owner be identified for all data assets.
The owner of data is responsible for classifying their data according to the
classification schema noted in this policy. If an owner cannot be determined for a
<COMPANY> data asset, the Data Security organization must act as its custodian.
The default classification for all data not classified by its owner must be either
confidential customer data or Proprietary company data.
The Data Security organization is responsible for developing, implementing, and
maintaining procedures for identifying all data assets and associated owners.
14 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
The owner of all customer data is the individual owner who generates or is assigned
ownership of that data. (Data such as public key certificates generated by an external
Certificate Authority but assigned to a specific customer are considered owned by
that customer.
Non-disclosure Agreements
The use of a non-disclosure agreement is a useful tool if data is used outside of the
organization. Its use depends upon local custom and legal environment.
On occasion, data assets may need to be released to entities outside of
<COMPANY>. When a legitimate business reason exists for releasing sensitive
information, a written Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA), requiring the data
recipient's agreement to maintain that data in confidence and restrict its use and
dissemination, must be obtained before disclosing the data.
Data Security Principles
The declaration of data security principles allows for a consistent approach to its
implementation across various platforms. These are industry standard concepts and lay the
foundation for security requirements and detailed procedures. The specific data security
principles are dependent upon your organizations business requirements for security
services.
<COMPANY>'s business goals, objectives, and needs for security can be derived
from three principles: accountability, authorization, and availability. These three
principles emphasize the need for security to function properly in <COMPANY>'s
processing environment, which is comprised of applications, network, and system
resources. Non-compliance with these principles can have serious, adverse, and
deleterious affects on <COMPANY>.
In the context of this policy, the following provides the overall concepts or security
principles for which all users and vendors are responsible. It is the responsibility of
the Data Security organization to define the specific mechanisms necessary to
support these principles.
Accountability
Accountability is the concept that every user must be responsible for their actions, so that in
the event of any questionable activity or breach of policy, a specific user can be identified. The
specific security services that support accountability are identification, authentication, and
auditing. For this policy statement, identification refers to a security service that recognizes
Data Security Policy Statement 15
a claim of identity by comparing a userid offered with stored security information.
Authentication refers to a security service that verifies the claimed identity of the user, for
example a password. Auditability refers to a security service that records information of
potential security significance.
All network, system, and application events should be attributable to a specific and
unique individual. It should be possible to attribute a responsible individual to
every event through an identification service and to verify that the individual so
assigned has been properly identified through an authentication service. It must also
be possible to trace any event so as to reconstruct the time, place, and circumstances
surrounding it through an audit service.
In this context identification refers to a security service that recognizes a claim of
identity by comparing a userid offered with stored security information.
Authentication refers to a security service that verifies the claimed identity of the
user, for example a password. Auditability refers to a security service that records
information of potential security significance.
Authorization
Authorization is a concept that access to data and system resources should be limited to a
need to know basis, and that specific users must be specifically allowed such access. For this
policy statement access control refers to a security service that allows or denies a user request
based on privilege, group information, or context. The specific security services that support
authorization are access control and confidentiality. Confidentiality refers to a security
service that prevents disclosure of information to unauthorized parties while the information
is in use or in transit, or while the information is being stored or destroyed.
All network, system, and application events must only result from allowable actions
through access control mechanisms. Permission may be derived directly from an
individual's identity, or from a job classification or administrative privilege based on
that individual's identity. The principle of “least privilege” specifies that individuals
only be granted permission for actions needed to perform their jobs.
Limiting actions to those properly authorized protects the confidentiality and
integrity of data within the <COMPANY> processing environment.
In this context access control refers to a security service that allows or denies a user
request based on privilege, group information, or context. Confidentiality refers to a
security service that prevents disclosure of information to unauthorized parties
while the information is in use or transit, or being storage or destroyed.
16 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
Availability
Availability is the concept that system and data resources must be accessible whenever they
are needed. The necessity for availability is dependent upon your particular business
proposition. The specific security service that supports availability is integrity. For this
policy statement, integrity refers to a security service that guarantees data has not been
altered, deleted, repeated, or rearranged during transmission, storage, processing, or recovery
All permitted activity should operate with reliability. The data necessary to carry out
such events must be readily retrieved and correct with high confidence. All results of
an event must be completed, unless the event is aborted in its entirety. The results of
an event should not depend in unexpected ways on other concurrent events. The
security services themselves must be documented and easily administered.
In this context integrity refers to a security service that guarantees data has not been
altered, deleted, repeated, or rearranged during transmission, storage, processing, or
recovery.
Core Security Principles
Your information systems security architecture, policies, procedures, practices, and
guidelines should be developed in concert with the principles stated below. The
following are the common core security principles recommended by industry best
practices.
n Accountability Principle – The accountability and responsibility of information
systems security should be explicit.
n Awareness Principle – Owners, providers, and users of information systems, and
other parties should be informed about (or readily able to gain appropriate
knowledge of) the existence and general extent of policies, responsibilities,
practices, procedures, and organization for security of information systems.
n Ethics Principle – Information systems and the security of information systems
should be provided and used in accordance with the ethical standards applicable
to your operating environment.
n Multidisciplinary Principle – Policies, responsibilities, practices, and procedures
for the security of information systems should consider all relevant aspects of this
effort, including technical (e.g. software and hardware engineering),
administrative, organizational, operational, commercial, educational, and legal.
n Proportionality Principle – Security levels, costs, practices, and procedures
should be appropriate and proportionate to the values of and degree of reliance
on the information systems and to the severity, probability, and extent of potential
for direct and indirect, tangible and intangible harm.
Core Security Principles 17
n Integration Principle – Policies, practices, and procedures for the security of
information systems should be coordinated and integrated with each other and
with other measures, practices, and procedures of the organization to ensure a
coherent system of security.
n Timeliness Principle – All personnel, assigned agents, and third party providers,
should act in a timely, coordinated manner to prevent and to respond to breaches
of the security of information systems.
n Reassessment Principle – The security of information systems should be
reassessed periodically.
n Democracy Principle – The security of an information system should be weighted
against the rights of customers, users, data owners, data custodians and other
individuals affected by the system, and against your rights as the owners and
operators of these systems.
n Certification and Accreditation Principle – Information systems and information
security professionals should be certified to be technically competent and
management should approve them for operation.
n Internal Control Principle – Information security forms the core of an
organization’s information internal control system.
n Adversary Principle – Controls, security strategies, architectures, policies,
standards, procedures, and guidelines should be developed and implemented in
anticipation of attack from intelligent, rational, and irrational adversaries with
harmful intent or harm from negligent or accidental actions.
n Least Privilege Principle – An individual should be granted only enough
privilege to accomplish assigned tasks, but no more.
n Separation of Duty Principle – Responsibilities and privileges should be allocated
in such a way that prevents an individual or a small group of collaborating
individuals from inappropriately controlling multiple key aspects of a process
and causing unacceptable harm or loss.
n Continuity Principle – Information security professionals should identify their
organization’s needs for disaster recovery and continuity of operations and
should prepare the organization and its information systems accordingly.
n Simplicity Principle – Information professionals should favor small and simple
safeguards over large and complex safeguards.
n Policy-Centered Security Principle – Policies, standards, and procedures should
be established as a basis for managing the planning, control, and evaluation of
information security activities.
18 Data Security Policy - Structure and Guidelines • December 2001
Summary
This template provided a brief description of recommended security policy topics
and an overview of core security policies. In addition, this template outlined a
sample Data Security Policy and Statement and provided commentary explaining
the details of each security topic and why it was chosen for the particular policy.
Finally, a detailed list of security policy principles was described.
This template was built from the Sun BluePrints article, Developing a Security Policy
(12/01), by Joel Weise and Charles R. Martin. The article is available from:
http://sun.com/blueprints/1201/secpolicy.pdf
Author’s Bio: JoelWeise
Joel Weise has worked in the field of data security for over 20 years. As a Senior Security
Architect for Sun Professional Services, he designs system and application security solutions
for a range of different enterprises from financial institutions to government agencies. He
specializes in cryptography and public key infrastructures. Prior to joining Sun, Joel was a
Senior Project Manager for Visa International. There he was responsible for developing
cryptographic standards, designing key management and cryptographic systems and
architecting security solutions for chipcard, Internet, and other new products.
Author’s Bio: Charles R. Martin
Charles R. Martin has been in the computer business for more than 30 years, and involved
with computer security since 1983. He was the original architect for a DARPA B3/A1 X
server, developed methods for covert channel analysis in full-scale UNIX kernels, and has coauthored
several chapters in the NRL handbook on trusted system evaluation. He is
currently a Senior Java Architect with Sun Microsystems in the Sun Java Center developing
methods for quantitative analysis of distributed system architectures, and a member of the
graduate faculty at the University of Colorado in Boulder.
There are two kinds of security: data and break-in. Data security is addressed by having a good backup system (see next section on computer security). Break-in security is often a matter of using passwords to files or systems where possible, locking systems in offices and managing modem dial-in. Have the modem on only when sending or receiving. 

1. To avoid losing information stored on your computers when, e.g., a disk breaks (or "crashes"), ensure that computer files are regularly backed up to another media, e.g., backed up onto magnetic tapes, "zip" disk, CD-ROM, etc. Store the media offsite, that is, in a facility other than at your organization. If a disk crashes, you can repair the disk or get a new one and then restore the information from the backup media onto the new disk.Or, if backup media cannot be afforded (most are only a few hundred dollars), ensure files are stored on at least two different media devices, e.g., stored on an internal hard disk and then also on a diskette. Using a diskette as backup simply requires the computer user to occasionally save away his or her file to the diskette in addition to the hard disk. The same diskette can be used to backup files. Label the diskette with the time period during which files were backed up to it. Note that the major software applications themselves (Word, Excel, etc.) do not have to be backed up because the organization usually has the software application's master diskettes. The most important items to backup are usually database files, spreadsheet files and large documents written by users. Conducting regular backups is more a matter of managerial policy than technical limitations. 

2. Use electrical surge protectors to ensure your computers will not experience sudden surges of electricity, e.g., during storms, if the quality of your electricity in your building is poor, or is the computer is turned off and on.

3. Protect unauthorized access to computer files by using passwords to log-on to your system, if possible. Critical files can be copied onto two different diskettes (with one as a backup for the other) and both stored in locked drawers. Be sure to label the diskettes such that you'll recognize them later by the name on the diskette label.

4. Ensure that computers remain working as much as possible (that is, maximum their uptime) by recording and testing detailed procedures for all routine, but critical, tasks performed by staff on the computers and associated peripherals, e.g., for computer backups and restores, fixing recurring problems, etc. Locate and label the procedures in a central location of which all staff are aware.

5. Develop competent internal technical support personnel who can help others to conduct basic activities on the computers and who can call outside consultants for troubleshooting when needed. Have one or two internal people who are designated as technical support contacts for other staff members.

6. Instruct staff to report all problems to the internal technical support people. That way, the internal people are aware of all problems and are more likely to detect oncoming problems as early as possible. They also become better trained at detecting and diagnosing problems.

7. Record all important phone numbers for technical support consultants or contacts, and ensure staff can find these numbers when needed.

8. Keep all software documentation, such as manuals and guides, stored in a central location where staff can find them. Post a sheet on the wall so they can check documents out and for control to ensure they are returned.

9. Promptly register all new software with the vendor to ensure you receive notification of regular software version updates and your eligibility to call the vendors for technical support if needed.

10. Keep the serial numbers of all software packages in a clearly visible place for ease of reference when calling the software vendor's technical support. (The vendor usually will ask you for the serial number to verify that you indeed purchased the software.)

11. Note that if you dissemble your computer hardware, you risk losing coverage of your warranty. During your warranty period (which often covers labor during the first 90 days and hardware during the first one or two years), always call the vendor as soon as you suspect any problems. Problems usually occur during the first several weeks if they occur at all.

12. Be sure to install a virus detector on your system. The detector should automatically check any new data brought into your system, for example, from diskettes, downloaded from the Internet, etc.

13. Develop a disaster recovery plan. The plan should address contingencies. It should include procedures to respond to, e.g., if a disk crashes, if the computer quits working, if the network is down, if the building is somehow destroyed, etc.

